<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
        <!DOCTYPE html>

        <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
        <head>
          <title>Chapter 12</title>
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/pygments.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/softcover.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/epub.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/custom.css" type="text/css"/>
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/custom_epub.css" type="text/css"/>
          <link rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml" href="styles/page-template.xpgt" />
        </head>

        <body>
          <div id="cid61" class="chapter"><h1><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#cid61" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">Chapter 12 </span>Making the Specialization Decision</a></h1>
<p class="noindent">@PICKUPHERE</p>
<p>In earlier versions of this book, I looked at specialization through the lens of this, which I called the Value-Specificity curve: TODO link to image</p>
<p>My admonition at that time was simple: just move from where you are towards the global maximum on that curve.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Where <em>is</em> the global maximum on that curve?<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I don’t know, because it’s unique to you!<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Just do it!</p>
<p>It was the right idea, but expressed in a general, hand-wavey way.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I think I can do better now.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It’s still very much a unique-to-you decision, but there is a standardized 7-step process almost anyone can follow to help make the decision about how to specialize.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I’ll present this process in this chapter.</p>
</div><div id="cid62" class="section"><h2><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#cid62" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.1 </span>Everybody starts from a different place</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">We all approach the specialization decision from a different starting point.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Yes, we can abstract this a bit and say if you’re not currently specialized, you’re probably some sort of generalist (you’ll say yes to almost any opportunity to apply your skill).<span class="intersentencespace"></span> But when you look closer, everyone is approaching the specialization decision with a different combination of skill, risk tolerance, business experience, and personality attributes.</p>
<p>If everyone was starting from the same place, I could offer perhaps just one “specialization decision-making recipe” that everyone could follow.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> But if I did that, some people’s head start would be overlooked, and others lack of a head start–or different form of head start–would present them with insurmountable challenges.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> So in reality, the decision is very individualized.</p>
<p>When I’m working with a coaching client, I’m looking at several factors to define their starting point.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> These factors include:</p>
<ul>
<li>Your previous client experience
</li>
<li>Your skillset
</li>
<li>Your interests
</li>
<li>Your risk tolerance
</li>
<li>Your financial strength or lack thereof
</li>
<li>Other aspects of your personality, like curiosity and assertiveness
</li>
<li>Other aspects of your life situation, like your ability to work harder or longer hours for a time, or lack thereof
</li></ul>
<p>Taken together, these 7 factors tend to define your starting point.</p>
</div><div id="cid63" class="section"><h2><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#cid63" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.2 </span>Some want different things</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">Just like everybody has a different starting point, everyone wants to achieve something slightly different by specializing.</p>
<p>Now if we abstract this, you get the superficial vs.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> deep specialization distinction I explained in Chapter 7.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You either want to use specialization in a superficial way (to get some quick marketing wins, for example) or a deep way (to make it possible to cultivate exceptionally valuable expertise).</p>
<p>But when I actually ask my clients why they want to specialize, I get an interesting range of answers.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Some specific examples:</p>
<ul>
<li>“Just make my marketing easier/better”
</li>
<li>“Just tell me how to have a pipeline so I’m not hand to mouth”
</li>
<li>“I want better clients”
</li>
<li>“I want to be a powerful expert”
</li>
<li>“I want to be wealthy”
</li>
<li>“Someone moved my cheese and I want it back”
</li></ul>
<p>Your answer to the question, “what do you want to achieve by specializing your business?”<span class="intersentencespace"></span> defines your end point.</p>
<p>With a starting and end point defined, we now have what it takes to draw a line, and the line between your starting and end point defines what you’ll need to do to successfully specialize your business.</p>
<p>How you actually decide how to specialize is based on what you want, your starting point, and personal factors like risk tolerance.</p>
</div><div id="cid64" class="section"><h2><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#cid64" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3 </span>A Process For Deciding</a></h2>
<div id="uid282" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid282" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.1 </span>1) Inventory</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">All previous significant experience (through a lens of what vertical that experience is in)</p>
<p>All horizontal abilities to move the needle, both actual and theoretical</p>
<p>All entrepreneurial theses you’re sitting on (difference between this and the above is that you might have to put together a team, or rent skill you don’t have, or build something that requires up-front investment, or just generally take on more risk–perhaps by pursuing a specialization you just can’t validate but you believe deeply in–as part of building out your market position)</p>
</div>
<div id="uid283" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid283" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.2 </span>2) Extend</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">All verticals that interest you</p>
<p>Horizontals that interest you</p>
</div>
<div id="uid284" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid284" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.3 </span>3) Quantify</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">Score all the items on the inventory according to:</p>
<ul>
<li>Access
</li>
<li>Credibility
</li>
<li>Impact
</li>
<li>Profitability
</li>
<li>Interest
</li></ul>
</div>
<div id="uid290" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid290" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.4 </span>4) Rank and Eliminate</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">Sort inventory based on aggregate score</p>
<p>Eliminate excessively risky items</p>
<p>TODO: consider including other elimination factors from SWF, like buying cycle length, etc.</p>
</div>
<div id="uid291" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid291" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.5 </span>5) Enrich</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">Size the market for top 3 vertical choices, make sure between 2k and 10k prospects</p>
<p>Identify options for reaching horizontal possibilities through networking or outbound.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If none, think long and hard about the inbound marketing work you’ll need to do, the skill and effort it will take to do it, and the time it will take to do it.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I could see a little side-survey here where I present a curated list of lead gen options (based perhaps on trust velocity or something similar) and ask readers to think through what it would take for them to execute on 1 to 3 of them consistently.</p>
</div>
<div id="uid292" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid292" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.6 </span>6) Validate</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">You’re looking to document relevant market interest, that’s all</p>
<p>Options for doing this:</p>
<ul>
<li>Build a list of competitors, make sure you can find at least a few and that there aren’t too many (&gt;20)
</li>
<li>Find conf talks that roughly map to your particular advantage
</li>
<li>Find any other evidence that money is being spent in a way that maps to your particular advantage
</li>
<li>Reach out to and speak with any competitors or non-competitive experts that you can
</li></ul>
<p>If you’re pursuing an entrepreneurial thesis, then the above forms of market viability may not be present, so your best bet will be to:</p>
<ul>
<li>Reach out to and speak with potential clients/customers using a customer development style of interview-based market research
</li>
<li>Additionally, you might create a strategy canvas to make sure your entrepreneurial theory targets a “real” opportunity in the market and validate that how you’re differentiating makes good sense
</li></ul>
</div>
<div id="uid299" class="subsection"><h3><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#uid299" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.3.7 </span>7) Decide</a></h3>
<p class="noindent">You have enough information to decide now.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You don’t have enough information to guarantee that the decision will work out well (you can never collect this much information because there are factors that are impossible to predict), but you do have enough information to make an intelligent decision.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> So decide, dammit!</p>
<p>{Upgrade to course offer via “Go Deeper” in-book sales pages.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Course is a revised version of SS W1, revised along the lines above.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> There is no different process, there is only more detail and more hand-holding in the course.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> And maybe I’ll throw in a DiSC profile as part of the price of the course.}</p>
</div></div><div id="cid65" class="section"><h2><a href="Making-the-specialization-decision_fragment.xhtml#cid65" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">12.4 </span>Chapter Summary</a></h2>
</div>
        </body>
        </html>