# [CH01] Why Positioning?

This manual is over 55,000 words on how to develop a desirable market position for your business. But the question of *why* to do this is easily answered in just 1 word:

**Asset**

A good market position is an intangible asset. It may also be the single most valuable and important asset -- tangible or intangible -- your services business could create.

And yet, it's somehow the _last_ asset many of you will get around to focusing on. It's the least well-understood. Deciding what this asset should look like may be the least emotionally comfortable decision you'll make. It brings up a group of fears known as "The Fear".

Building a good market position requires facing and managing The Fear. I'll equip you to do this in chapters 3 and 8.

Building a good market position requires making a good decision about how to specialize. I'll use chapters 4 - 7 and 9 - 11 to help you do that.

Building a good market position doesn't stop with simply deciding how to specialize. Chapter 11 helps you take the right kind of action on your specialization decision.

And finally, building a good market position can completely transform your business for the better. It can allow you to dramatically increase profitability by increasing the value you deliver to clients. The source of that value is rare, valuable expertise. I discuss this in Chapter 13.

To build a good market position, you must specialize.

If The Fear has prevented you from specializing, or the somewhat mysterious nature of the decision making process had delayed your deciding, then here's what you're missing out on:

**1) You probably started your business with very little strategic thinking**. You very likely started at whatever the easiest starting point was. That's certainly how I did it. 

When you specialize, you circle back to -- and finally solve -- the critical, foundational strategy decision about what your business focus is.

**2) Cultivating new business is probably a struggle for you**. You don't know -- aside from useless criteria like "pays their invoice on time" -- _who_ your ideal client is, and you have no repeatable method for earning visibility and trust from new prospects. 

When you specialize, it becomes possible to proactively reach new prospects, and you create a meaningful difference between your business and competitors.

**3) You probably operate from a position of weakness in price negotiations with clients**. Value pricing may be impossible because you're never talking to a high-level buyer who is responsible for future value creation. 

When you specialize, your make it possible to cultivate rare, valuable expertise which makes it possible to operate from a position of power with new clients. You get more input on how the project is set up, and you get the ability to charge a premium or super-premium price.

**4) Right now, growth in your business probably feels outside your control**. You have good years, and you have bad years, and there seems to be nothing you can do to create more good years or get on a path to consistent growth.

When you specialize, profitability increases as a by-product of premium pricing combined with better internal efficiencies. More money + less time spent delivering for clients = more profit.

**5) Right now, you lack ultimate control over what you do in your business**. You probably say yes to work you'd rather decline, but can't because you need the revenue.

When you specialize -- because of the increased profitability -- you gain the ability to say no for strategic and lifestyle reasons. This kind of power and flexibility very often leads to a happier and less annoyed version of you.

This manual is meant to help you make a good specialization decision and to help you start translating that decision into a strong market position. In it I've collected every useful tool, process, and mental framework that's come out of 5 years of helping clients make this important decision. I hope that weaving these all together into this book helps you make the critical specialization decision for your own business with confidence and speed.

## Who This Manual Is For

This manual will be most helpful to a narrow range of people:

- Owners of technical services firms like dev shops, technical consultancies, web or digital agencies, and SaaS companies.
- Independent consultants or freelancers of many stripes, though all my examples in this manual are specific to the technical rather than the creative end of the professional services spectrum.
- People who are considering making the leap to solo self-employment but haven't done it yet.
- Self-employed people who need to be making more money within 24 to 36 months, but can invest 6 to 12 months of effort to lay the foundation.

This manual will *not* be immediately helpful to you if you have very limited work experience or "the wolf is at the door" in terms of your finances. Developing a desirable market position requires discipline that will be very difficult to muster if you have little savings, credit, or leeway in terms of saying no to work in the short term. 

Making a good specialization decision requires a certain amount of self-awareness about your strengths and preferences, and you just can't discover that stuff without a year or three of client work under your belt.
