<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
        <!DOCTYPE html>

        <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
        <head>
          <title>Chapter 4</title>
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/pygments.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/softcover.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/epub.css" type="text/css" />
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/custom.css" type="text/css"/>
          <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/custom_epub.css" type="text/css"/>
          <link rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml" href="styles/page-template.xpgt" />
        </head>

        <body>
          <div id="cid16" class="chapter"><h1><a href="Positioning-vs-Specialization_fragment.xhtml#cid16" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">Chapter 4 </span>Positioning vs.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Specialization</a></h1>
<p class="noindent">When I ask you to think of the <em>best</em> cloud platform as a service, what company or platform do you think of?</p>
<p>No matter whether you thought of AWS, GCP, Digital Ocean, or one of dozens of other cloud providers, you are responding to that product or company’s <em>reputation</em>.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That reputation may be private to you, or it may be shared among a group of people.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Here’s what I mean.</p>
<p>There’s a product called Zencastr that records podcasts interviews using a browser-based, double-ended approach.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Zencastr has a generally positive reputation among the group of podcasters that I am friends with, but I have a very negative view of Zencastr.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> The product’s “private” reputation with me as an individual is in tatters because the product failed me the two times I tried it.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s a 100% failure rate!<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Others have had different experiences with a more favorable success rate.</p>
<p>It’s no surprise that I personally dislike Zencastr and avoid using it while others who are demographically similar to me like it and prefer to use it.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> The product’s reputation as it exists inside my mind is not good, while its reputation as it exists inside the mind of my peer group is very different, and much more positive.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Same product, multiple reputations.</p>
<p><strong>A reputation that is similar across a group of people is also known as a </strong><em><strong>market position</strong></em><strong>.</strong></p>
<p>Shall we play a game?</p>
<p>Either physically or mentally, make a dot on the diagram below.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Where you place the dot should accurately describe your perception of two product lines.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> One dot for Apple’s products, and another dot for Facebook’s products.</p>
<p>{TODO:Blank 2x2 matrix with cost on one axis and security on the other}</p>
<p>Show and tell time.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> How much does your diagram look like mine?</p>
<p>{TODO:My filled-in 2x2}</p>
<p>Just notice how similar or different your placement of Apple and Facebook’s dots are to mine.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It’s not that mine are “right” and yours are or aren’t “right”.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s not the point here at all, because there is no right or wrong placement of dots.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Instead, the dots tell us something about Apple and Facebook’s reputations <em>as they exist inside my mind and your mind</em>.</p>
<p>Let’s revisit the Zencaster example.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Here’s a similar 2x2 matrix showing Zencastr’s reputation as it exists in my mind compares to how it exists in the minds of my podcaster friends:</p>
<p>{TODO: 2x2 with value of features on one axis and reliability on the other, with a cluster of dots from my peers in the high value, reasonably reliable quadrant and my lone dot on the high value, low reliability quadrant}</p>
<p><strong>Generally, the more consistency there is in the placement–or </strong><em><strong>positioning</strong></em><strong>–of Apple, Facebook, Zencastr, or any business on a diagram like this, the more widely shared and homogenous that companies reputation–or market position–is.</strong></p>
<p>There’s a seeming contradiction in this idea of a market position.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If we could survey every living human, we would probably find very few businesses with a highly homogenous market position.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If we could ask every living human to place Apple and Facebook on our 2x2 matrix, we’d find lots of variances because people have a wide range of preferences and worldview filters.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If different people place–or <em>position</em>–the same product or company in different positions on this matrix, how can any company have a clearly defined market position?<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Said differently, how can any company know how its products or services are perceived by the market?</p>
<p>In practice, this is not actually a problem, and it’s especially un-problematic for <em>you</em> because most companies and definitely yours will <em>never</em> need to be perceived in precisely the same way by every human on the planet.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Most small services businesses can get away with the right group of 1,000 to 10,000 people perceiving them the “right” way.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Helping that many people perceive you the way you want to be perceived is still no small feat, but it’s infinitely more achievable than trying to help every human on the planet perceive you the way you want to be perceived.</p>
<p><strong>A market position–again, your </strong><em><strong>reputation</strong></em><strong>–is how you are perceived by the group of people who need to know about you for your business to thrive.</strong></p>
<p>This “group of people who need to know about you for your business to thrive” thing is important.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> We marketers have a shorthand for this: your <em>target market</em>.</p>
<p>Lots of us who start out as freelancers and then graduate to consultants or entrepreneurs or agency owners start out with an accidental target market.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> We don’t choose it; we inherit it, and usually we take whatever we can get.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Additionally, these initial target markets are a haphazard and heterogenous mixture of our personal network, past clients, friends, and random business associates.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> They look like a Jackson Pollock painting.</p>
<p>Then, we become more intentional and willing to be more disciplined, and that means either sticking with a subset of our initial target market because we have a head start there, or intentionally choosing a different target market because our interest doesn’t align with a head start or because we have no head start at all.</p>
<p>Target market selection is at first very much about finding the right “home” for your skills then later staying committed to a place where you can cultivate valuable expertise.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> A supply of water has relatively high value in the desert and relatively lower value in a rain forest.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> In other words, value is contextual.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If you find yourself in a rain forest with a supply of water you want to sell, you can either move to a desert (new target market) or find something else to sell (change your skills, expertise, or packaging of those things).<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Creating exceptional value is very much about identifying the right <em>context</em> within which to create that value.</p>
<p>Let’s review: Your market position is your reputation among a <em>specific</em> group of people.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> This means you need to make some decisions:</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>How</strong> do you want to be perceived?<span class="intersentencespace"></span>
</li>
<li><strong>Among what group</strong> do you want to be perceived that way?<span class="intersentencespace"></span>
</li>
<li>You probably are not currently perceived in the way you’d like to be.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> So the last question is: <strong>what needs to happen </strong><em><strong>now</strong></em><strong></strong> to create the reputation you want <em>later</em>?<span class="intersentencespace"></span>
</li></ul>
<p><strong> The decision you make </strong><em><strong>now</strong></em><strong> in service of </strong><em><strong>a future reputation</strong></em><strong> is usually some form of </strong><em><strong>specialization</strong></em><strong>.</strong></p>
<p>If you’re reading closely, you’ll have noticed that I used the word <em>positioning</em> in the title of this book and in some of the previous chapters, but I have not used it in this chapter until now.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s because, strictly speaking, the word “positioning” is a verb.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It’s a thing you <em>do</em>.</p>
<p>Except when it comes to marketing, that’s exactly what it is <em>not</em>.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> A position–or more specifically a <em>market position</em>–is not a verb.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It is more like a noun.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It is a thing that exists in the minds of a group of people.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It’s a concept, an association, a feeling, or a vivid memory.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Those are all nouns, not verbs.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Things, not actions.</p>
<p>So why is it so commonly said “Company X is positioning itself as {thing}” or, “You need to position your business”?<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I’ll dive more into this in the next chapter, but for now just know that people mean one of two things when they say “positioning”, and you have to dig a little deeper to know which of those two things they mean.</p>
<p>For now, just know that it’s a sort of lazy convention within marketing to talk about the process of building a desirable market position (reputation) as “positioning”.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Even I make this mistake from time to time, despite striving to be accurate in how I speak.</p>
<p>That said, there is a verb that describes exactly what it is you do to build a desirable market position.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That verb is “specialize” or “specialization”.</p>
</div><div id="cid17" class="section"><h2><a href="Positioning-vs-Specialization_fragment.xhtml#cid17" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">4.1 </span>Specializing is an action</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">The act of specializing is based on a decision about focus.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Where do you want to focus?<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You could focus on a target market, focus on type of problem you want to solve, focus on a type of change you want to effect, or focus on a specific and possibly unique way of delivering your services.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> There really are only about 4 different ways you can focus.</p>
<p>After you’ve made the decision about where to focus (there will be <strong>much</strong> more about making this decision this later in this book), you apply time and discipline to grow this seed of a decision into a desirable market position.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I like this analogy: The decision about how exactly to specialize is the seed, time and discipline are the nourishment that seed needs, and the plant we see growing out of the ground after some time passes is the market position.</p>
<p>{TODO: book cover/theme image shown here}</p>
</div><div id="cid18" class="section"><h2><a href="Positioning-vs-Specialization_fragment.xhtml#cid18" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">4.2 </span>About time</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">Time is a critical element in cultivating a market position for a services business.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You can’t create the market position overnight, just like no plant grows from a seed to maturity overnight.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> The concept of a market position applies to more than just services, it also applies to products and brands.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> When we look at how services businesses and product businesses cultivate a market position, we see some significant differences, especially as it relates to <em>time</em>.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Understanding these differences will help you contextualize the various bits of advice about positioning that you’ll come across from various sources.</p>
<p>Product positioning is based on the inherent objective observability of a product, and the ability of advertising to amplify a message about those observable features.</p>
<p>The superior build quality of Apple’s first generation unibody aluminum MacBooks was easily observable when compared to Windows PCs of the same generation.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Almost anybody paying any level of attention would notice the sturdy yet smooth movement of the hinge that supported the MacBook screen.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That person could pick up the computer and try to flex or twist it and see how strong it was.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> They could bang on the keyboard and feel how little give there was.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> And side by side with a same-generation Windows PC, they would notice a distinct difference in build quality.</p>
<p>This is what I mean when I say products have an inherent objective observability.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You can see, feel, smell, taste, and <em>measure</em> the differences between products.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> This lends a sense of objectivity to how we compare products.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Products also tend to have fixed, known prices, which further lends a sense of objectivity to how we compare them.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> “Apple is expensive, but very high quality.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> PCs are cheaper but lower quality.”<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Reasonable people can disagree on those bottom line assessments, but at least you can explain <em>why</em> you arrive at that conclusion.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> “See!<span class="intersentencespace"></span> When you press on the MacBook’s case it doesn’t flex at all!<span class="intersentencespace"></span> When you press on this PC’s case, it flexes 2 or 3 millimeters.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s why the Apple is more expensive!”</p>
<p>Services have no such objective observability.</p>
<p>Because most services are custom scope, custom price, and delivered under various forms of secrecy, they lack this quality of objective observability.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> We try to compensate for this with case studies, testimonials, and other post hoc artifacts that come from successful engagements.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> This is how we try to make our services seem more objectively observable, but ultimately they are not.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> They’re like any human relationship: there’s the reality of the relationship, there’s what your close friends know about it, and there’s what everybody else thinks they know about it.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Those are three distinctly different categories of knowledge about the actual thing.</p>
<p>The inherent observability of products means that advertising or PR can be used to amplify that observability and more quickly build a market position.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Even if you’ve never driven a car made by Tesla Motors, you probably know roughly what it would be like to drive one.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s because you’ve seen them photographed, videoed, talked about, reacted to by others–all at scale–and this creates for you a mental model of what it would be like to drive the car.</p>
<p>Contrast your mental model of what it would be like to drive a Tesla with your mental model of what it would be like to hire and work with McKinsey &amp; Company.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> That’s also a prestigious brand, but it’s a services company with much less inherent observability.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> If you’ve never hired or worked with McKinsey &amp; Company, how would you possibly know what it’s like to have the experience of working with them?</p>
<p>The inherent observability of products means it can be faster and easier to develop a reputation for a product.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> With a $5,000 budget and a week of time you could develop a reputation for a product that doesn’t even exist.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I’m not saying this is legal or ethical, but it would work.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You mock up a product, Photoshop it into Facebook ad creative associating it with someone currently famous within the culture you’re focused on (this is the unethical/illegal part because it implies this famous person’s endorsement which they haven’t actually given you), target the ad effectively, and you’ve have a pretty good shot for developing a reputation quickly–or at least a “micro-reputation”.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> In doing this you would be tapping into latent associations, beliefs, and stories in order to more quickly build a reputation for your imaginary product.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Some who see the add will react like this:”Kim Kardashian is such an annoying person.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I’d never buy something she recommends.”<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Others will react like this: “Kim Kardashian is amazing.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> She made herself into a celebrity with nothing but hustle and smarts.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> I love buying the products she recommends.”<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Two stories; two different ways your fast-track product reputation-building could go.</p>
<p>To be fair, some of this also applies at least partially to the world of services.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> There are “hacks” that can more quickly build your reputation–at least among individuals.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Price, visual branding, and certain forms of social proof are three of these “hacks” because they’re signals that shortcut some of the normal work or time required for reputation-building.</p>
<p>In the main, however, a reputation for a services business takes time to build.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> It’s something like a seed for a tree, which will take years to grow into something substantial.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Reputations are built over years, not days or weeks (though I scarcely need mention they can be damaged much faster than they can be built).<span class="intersentencespace"></span> You should plan on 2 to 3 years of focused, disciplined effort to translate a specialization decision into a strong market reputation.</p>
</div><div id="cid19" class="section"><h2><a href="Positioning-vs-Specialization_fragment.xhtml#cid19" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">4.3 </span>Standing on shoulders</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">I did not invent the concepts of market position and specializing.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Far from it!<span class="intersentencespace"></span> These concepts were formalized decades ago, and have been around in some less well defined form for centuries.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Others {TODO: footnote them} have written very useful books that are well worth reading if you’re a student of marketing or wanting to understand a variety of perspectives on positioning.</p>
<p>I wrote this book because nobody else has explained exactly how specialization, market position, and expertise relate to each other within the domain of solo practitioners or small shops who provide technology consulting services.<span class="intersentencespace"></span> Taking advantage of these three concepts can transform your business, and so a book that addresses them within the specific context of a business like yours needed to exist.</p>
</div><div id="cid20" class="section"><h2><a href="Positioning-vs-Specialization_fragment.xhtml#cid20" class="heading hyperref"><span class="number">4.4 </span>Chapter Summary</a></h2>
<p class="noindent">TODO</p>
</div>
        </body>
        </html>